It seems like there are millions of blogs on the internet. For every popular
blog there is, there are hundreds of smaller blogs that go unnoticed. Should you
start a blog if it will go unnoticed? Personally, I think the answer is yes.
Different people may have different takes on this. There is an incentive to
start a website in the hopes that it will become popular and make add revenue.
However, I argue that there is a intrinsic value to a personal blog.

# Organize Your thoughts


Being able to clearly articulate your ideas is beneficial. Having time to brew
over topics in a blog posts helps that process. Even though I worked with both
Nodejs and PHP, I might not be able to a convincingly debate with somebody why
one is the better platform. Writing a blog posts allows me to fully flesh out my
own ideas.

# Learn


When writing a blog post, you want to be complete. If there are any gaps in my
knowledge, I will look that information up. This is a great learning
opportunity; like taking notes in a class.

# Stand Out


Out of everyone who uses the internet, only 1% of them contributes additional
content. Blogging can make you stand out in a competitive economy when looking
for jobs.

# Relax


This may not be true of some bigger blogs, but, writing blog posts is very
relaxing. It gives you time to slow down relax and reflect. There are dozens of
distinct types of blogs. Some blogs are more personal like a diary. Other blogs
may be very technical. I am going to try to have Jrtechs fall in the middle.
There are already millions of tutorials on the internet, I just want to share my
experience on topics that interest me. In this way writing blogs are relaxing
and don’t feel like work.

# Become A Better Blogger

There is no way to become better at something other than doing it a lot. Since
starting this website when I was middle school, my writing skills have increased
considerably. Looking back at some of older blog posts and noticing some of my
typos makes me cringe and die on the inside. Despite writing terrible blog posts
in the past, I have never regretted doing so. I see them as opportunities for
growth. The terrible blog posts that I wrote in the past along with school, has
allowed me to write blog posts that are meh. However, being “meh” is ok if you
are on the track towards writing better.
