WordPress currently has a bad reputation on the internet. Many people argue that
the technology WordPress uses(PHP) is out of date. Tons of people leave
WordPress for sites like [Wix](https://www.wix.com/) and
[squarespace](https://www.squarespace.com/) simply because they are easier to
use. There are valid points to these arguments. However, I would like to argue
that WordPress is honestly not that terrible. There are hundreds of themes and
plugins which make WordPress a very robust platform to use. Content management
on WordPress is also very easy to manage. It may take more time to set up a
WordPress site; however, it is well worth it in the end. WordPress is definitely
not the solution for every website, but it is still adequate for blogs.

I did not leave because I hated WordPress, I left simply because I wanted to
build something of my own. This blog has been deserted for several years and I
decided that it was time to bring it back to life. I decided to totally recreate
my blog using Nodejs from the ground up. Going into this endeavor two weeks ago,
I knew absolutely nothing about Nodejs other than it was a JavaScript framework
for back end web development. I knew a fair amount of JavaScript, so the project
went smoothly except for synchronization bugs. Going from PHP development to a
Nodejs development took some transitioning, but in the end, I think it was well
worth it. I will write a post about the differences between PHP and Nodejs in
the future.

You still might not understand why I stopped using WordPress. Personally, I
think I left because using WordPress would have been too easy. Donâ€™t get me
wrong, GUIs are very nice, but I wanted to know how the blog actually worked. I
could have taken the time to learn how to develop WordPress plugins but that
would have been a waste of time. Even though I feel that WordPress is a good
blogging platform, Nodejs is taking over the web. It is frightening how much
stuff you can do with JavaScript. Not only is Nodejs faster than PHP, but you
can do front and back end web development with it. There are dozens of blogging
platforms written with Nodejs, but I wanted to teach myself how to program
Nodejs by taking on a huge project.

If you are interested in the source code for this website, check it out on my
[github](https://github.com/jrtechs/NodeJSBlog).
